# Inheritance of Chinese Traditional Music Based on Markov Chain Modelling

## Metadata

- **Authors:** Zhan Qi¹, Jun Long²,†, Yaoyong Duan³
- **Affiliations:**
  1.  School of Music, Jining University, Qufu, Shandong, 273155, China.
  2.  School of Music, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing, 401120, China.
  3.  Smart Police Academy, China People's Police University, Langfang, Shandong, 273155, China.
- **Journal:** Applied Mathematics and Nonlinear Sciences
- **Year:** 2024
- **Volume/Issue/Pages:** 9(1), 1-17
- **DOI:** `https://doi.org/10.2478/amns.2023.2.01109`
- **ISSN:** 2444-8656
- **Submission Info:**
  - Communicated by Z. Sabir
  - Received January 13, 2023
  - Accepted May 22, 2023
  - Available online November 11, 2023
- **Corresponding Author:** Jun Long (†), Email address: `20130633@cqnu.edu.cn`
- **Keywords:** Markov chain; Traditional music; Probability matrix; Time-value sequence; Cultural heritage.
- **AMS 2010 codes:** 97M80
- **Copyright/License:** © 2023 Zhan Qi, Jun Long and Yaoyong Duan, published by Sciendo. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution alone 4.0 License.

## Abstract

In this paper, we first propose a Markov chain-based automatic composition method to construct a song set using classical and traditional music as a sample. Using probability matrices, experiments are conducted to generate pitch and time value sequences, and melodic segments of traditional music are generated using transformation techniques. Secondly, a traditional music digital resource library that integrates multiple functions is constructed by utilizing various information technologies. Finally, based on the existing classification dimensions, the relationship between various types of influencing factors in the inheritance of traditional music was analyzed, and the structure of the questionnaire was initially constructed. The results show that the correlation coefficients between the cultural inheritance of traditional music and its resources, environmental threats, development level, diversified values, public demand, and social cognition are 0.4235, 0.0953, 0.3594, 0.4253, 0.5348, and 0.5224, respectively, and there is a significant positive influence. This paper provides some theoretical and practical guidance for the protection and inheritance of traditional music.

## Introduction

With the development of modern information technology, the data collection and organization of music does not only stay in the auditory system of recording and textual information [1-2]. The study of music is not only the study of music ontology but also the study of music culture, and this research demands not only auditory completion but also needs to be combined with information technology to complete the synthesis [3-4]. It can be said that the current excavation and protection of Chinese traditional music has achieved important milestones [5]. However, after the realization of the protection stage, we have to face how to inherit excellent traditional music more effectively so that it can be more widely continued and disseminated in the new era, which is the most urgent problem at present [6-7].

Traditional music culture is a kind of music form and cultural category with distinctive regional cultural characteristics created by the working people in various regions, which is the people's collective historical memory and crystallization of accumulation and is the inexhaustible power of continuous development [8]. Literature [9] discusses the integration and application of Chinese ethnic elements in electronic music, as well as the crossover and combination between Chinese traditional music elements and electronic music technology, which is of innovative significance to the appreciation and cultural inheritance of traditional music. Literature [10] proposed a self-regulation practice behavior scale to measure the characteristics and influencing factors of Chinese traditional music majors in order to promote students' self-regulation and practice behavior. Literature [11] used music computer technology to record, analyze and interpret traditional music, folk songs and folklore music and to help researchers better understand and preserve the characteristics, history and changes of folklore music.

The problem of intergenerational inheritance of traditional music is a fatal problem that restricts the development of traditional music, and this problem boils down to the problem of talent [12]. Talent is the root of cultural inheritance and continuity and is the source of the vitality of traditional music cultural inheritance [13]. Literature [14] believes that digital technology, the Internet and social media have a promotional significance for the inheritance and display of traditional music, and digital information technology can enable the expression of the aesthetic characteristics of the musical works of traditional musical instruments and musical forms. Literature [15] utilizes new media technologies to change the ways and methods of higher traditional music education. The authors argue that educators utilize new media tools such as online platforms, social media, and distance learning to provide a richer, more flexible, and more interactive traditional music education experience. Literature [16] explores the integration of traditional music performers in Lijiang with the tourism industry, where their music performances are transformed into part of the tourist experience and driven by market demand and economic interests, thus enabling traditional music to be passed on.

In this paper, firstly, we propose Markov chain-based automatic composition, which constructs a sample song set by collecting and processing classical and traditional folk songs and then obtains songs of the same tonality by preprocessing the song melodies. Secondly, by analyzing these songs, the probability matrix of the pitch, as well as the time value in the melody, is derived, and the probability matrix is used to conduct pitch and time value sequence generation experiments, which are transformed to obtain the melodic segments of traditional music. Then, a variety of information technologies are comprehensively applied to construct a traditional music digital resource library that combines a variety of functions. Lastly, based on the current classification dimensions, the association between various types of influencing factors of traditional music inheritance is examined, and the initial questionnaire structure is established. The value of the traditional music category of non-heritage is derived through the empirical study of the questionnaire.

## Methods

### Section 2: Markov chain-based automatic generation of traditional music

This paper analyzes traditional music from different perspectives, such as the current development status and functional characteristics of existing traditional music and its advantages in the process of sustainable development and self-adaptation of the social environment. The sustainability of traditional music is dependent on innovation, and by combining traditional melodies and lyrics with modern creative methods, fashionable and unique styles can be created. Accordingly, this paper proposes a Markov chain algorithm to design an automatic model of traditional music melody. The content is divided into the composition process, the collection and organization of sample songs, the analysis of sample songs, and the construction of new melodies, with the aim of exploring the feasibility of the traditional music composition algorithm based on the Markov chain.

#### 2.1 Traditional Music Composition Process Design

Markov chains are relatively common mathematical, statistical probabilistic methods used for sequence prediction. Without considering other complexities, music can be viewed as a sequence consisting of pitches and durations, so in this paper, we use first-order Markov chains for traditional music generation studies.

Assuming that the sequence of states at moment x, is j, and the sequence of states at moment X₁₁ is i, and that the state j at moment x, is only related to state i at moment X₁₁ by the definition of the Markov model, the transfer probability is mathematically described as follows:

Pᵢⱼ = p(i → j) = p(xₜ = j | xₜ₋₁ = i) (1)

Multiple transfer probabilities can form a matrix of transfer probabilities, and the state transfer matrix p is represented as follows:

      [ P₁₁ P₁₂ ... P₁k ]

P = [ P₂₁ P₂₂ ... P₂k ]
[ : : : ]
[ Pk₁ Pk₂ ... Pkk ]

P = [Pᵢⱼ]ₖₓₖ (2)

In the above equation, k denotes the total number of states and pᵢⱼ(i, j = 1,2,3,…, k) denotes the transfer from the current state i to the next state. Where, the probability of j should satisfy the following conditions:

0 < Pᵢⱼ < 1 (3)

Σ Pᵢⱼ = 1 (k=1) (4)

According to the logic of the Markov chain and the conditions necessary for generating traditional music melodies, the Markov composition process is displayed as shown in Figure 1. The automatic composition process based on the Markov chain first constructs a sample song set by collecting and processing classical, traditional folk songs and then obtains songs of the same tonality by preprocessing the song melodies. These songs are analyzed to derive the probability matrix of pitch as well as time value in the melody, and the probability matrix is used for pitch and time value sequence generation experiments. The final transformation is performed to obtain the melodic fragment of the song.

_(Figure 1. Flowchart of Markov chain-based automatic generation of traditional music.)_

#### 2.2 Sample music collection and organization

This paper collects the required sample songs through expert consultation and literature research due to the absence of an authoritative expert database and dataset for Chinese traditional music. The traditional Chinese music collected in this section consists of ten representative and widely disseminated traditional Chinese music songs, the source of which is “Selected Traditional Chinese Music Songs," and the format of the collected sample songs is JPG format sheet music images. Table 1 displays the current list of traditional Chinese music songs that have been collected.

_(Table 1. A sample collection of Chinese traditional music songs - lists songs like Butterfly Lovers, The Golden Snake Dances Wildly, etc.)_

There are many tunings in the sample song set that are in different keys, so if the tunings are directly analyzed using tunings in different keys, the subsequent analysis of the music will be affected, resulting in inaccurate results of the analysis of the music and thus affecting the results of the subsequent generation of the traditional music. Therefore, it is necessary to standardize the tuning of the piece to C natural major and A natural minor. In addition, in terms of tuning, traditional music belongs to the Chinese national tuning, which can be judged by the tuning judgment method in musicology, and if other tunings appear in a few pieces, they will be temporarily excluded from consideration. Then, it will be temporarily excluded from the consideration range so as to shift the tuning processing of the sample songs that do not meet the conditions. Figure 2 shows the comparison chart before and after the tonal processing, where (a) is before the tonal processing, and (b) is the result after the tonal processing. The transposition is assisted by sibelius software, and after all the sample songs are transposed, the song information will be more unified, which is conducive to the subsequent analysis of the music.

_(Figure 2. Shows a comparison before and after the modulation process)_

#### 2.3 Analysis of traditional sample music based on Markov chains

Markov chain is a technique based on probabilistic statistics, and Markov-based compositions focus on the intrinsic connection of individual notes, generating a melody for a piece of music derived from the observation and analysis of the melodic characteristics of a sample musical composition.

##### 2.3.1 Obtaining Pitch Sequences and Time Value Sequences

In the processed sample melodies, the pitches of all the notes in each song are extracted to form a pitch sequence. Take the sample music “Butterfly Lovers” as an example. The obtained monophonic melody is composed into a pitch sequence as follows:

S<0xE1><0xB5><0xA1>₁ = {c², a¹, g¹, ..., c¹, a} (5)

Where S<0xE1><0xB5><0xA1>₁ denotes the set of all note pitches in the song Butterfly Lovers. The series in it denotes the order of occurrence of the pitches as well as the number of them. Using the same method, the sequence of note timings of the sample song ‘Butterfly Lovers' can be obtained as shown below:

S<0xE1><0xB5><0xB4>₁ = {1/4, 1/8, 1/8, ..., 1/8, 1/4} (6)

Where S<0xE1><0xB5><0xB4>₁ denotes the set of all note tensors in the song "Butterfly Lovers", where the series denotes the order in which the note tensors appear as well as the number of note tensors, and the note tensors correspond to the pitch order.

##### 2.3.2 Getting the note distribution

In this section, the note distribution consists of the pitch and the time value of the note, and the Markov model needs to obtain the initial distribution of the pitch and the time value, respectively.

The acquisition of the initial pitch distribution satisfies the following conditions:

D(p<0xE2><0x82><0x98>) = pn / PN (7)

Where the starting pitch distribution is the ratio of the number of a particular pitch in a given pitch sequence to the number of all pitches in the sequence. D(p<0xE2><0x82><0x98>) is the distribution of a certain pitch in a certain pitch sequence, pn indicates the number of times a certain pitch appears in that pitch sequence, and PN is the total number of pitches in the pitch sequence.

After subjecting all sample songs to the above process, the initial distribution of overall notes and time values will be obtained, and the total distribution will satisfy the following conditions:

Dt<0xE2><0x82><0x96> = Σtn / ΣTN (8)

The set is the entire set of sample songs with the initial distribution of all note pitches:

SDp = {Dp₁, Dp₂, Dp₃,…, Dpₖ} (9)

Where SDp is the distribution of a particular time value in the sequence of time values of all sample songs, Dt<0xE2><0x82><0x96> is the time value, Σtn is the number of a particular time value in the sequence of time values of all sample songs, and ΣTN is the total number of all time values in the sequence of time values of sample songs.

##### 2.3.3 Obtaining the note transfer probability matrix

By counting each sample song and summing all Pij, the probability that the note is shifted in P<0xE1><0xB5><0xA1> all sample songs can be obtained as:

P<0xE1><0xB5><0xA1> = Σ Pij (10)

      [ P₁₁ P₁₂ ... Pᵢⱼ ]

P<0xE1><0xB5><0xA1> = [ P₂₁ P₂₂ ... P₂ⱼ ]
[ : : : ]
[ Pᵢ₁ Pᵢ₂ ... Pᵢⱼ ]

P<0xE1><0xB5><0xA1> = [Pᵢⱼ] (11)

Where Pij denotes the transfer probability distribution of note i → j in a particular sample time value sequence, and (i, j) denotes the number of times the sequence starts with time value i and the next time value is j. (i,x) denotes the number of times the event starts at time value i and the next time value is x (any time value) occurs in the sequence, and the ratio of the two is the transfer probability of time value i → j.

#### 2.4 Construction of a new melody

The construction of the new melody is based on the transfer probability matrix of note pitch and time value, which constitutes a pitch sequence and a time value sequence, respectively, according to the relationship between note pitch and time value, and transforms the two into a musical score.

From the Markov model, if there is any note i, the library of musical melodies constructed contains n states labeled S = {S₁, S₂,..., S<0xE2><0x82><0x99>} by and if the music evaluation state is denoted as qₜ. Then, the transition matrix between different musical melodies can be expressed as:

aᵢⱼ(k) = P[qₜ₊₁ = Sⱼ| qₜ = Sᵢ], 1 ≤ i, j ≤ N (12)

In the continuous distribution test for new melodies, the probability distribution of the corresponding melodic state is observed to be:

bⱼ(vₜ) = P[vₜ| qₜ = Sⱼ], 1 ≤ j ≤ N (13)

In general, the probability distribution is taken to be uniform. In other words:

bⱼ(vₜ) = Σ<0xE2><0x82><0x98>₁<0xE1><0xB5><0x8D>¹ ωⱼ<0xE2><0x82><0x98> N(Oₜ, μⱼ<0xE2><0x82><0x98>, Σⱼ<0xE2><0x82><0x98>) (14)

Where bⱼ(vₜ) represents the number of uniform distributions and ωⱼ represents the mixing weights of positive correlations.

The forward melody defined in this paper is:

αₜ(i) = P(O₁O₂...Oₜ, qₜ = i| λ) (15)

Where αₜ(i) is the new melody sequence and O₁O₂...Oₜ is the parameter λ.

The calculation method of the pitch sequence, which is similar to the calculation method of the time value sequence, is used to predict the next time value by collecting the initial probability distribution of the time value and the transfer probability distribution of the sample song, combined with the current time value. The time values are represented as whole notes, half notes, quarter notes, eighth notes, and sixteenth notes by (1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, and 1/16), respectively. After obtaining the pitch and time sequences, the two correspond to each other to obtain a new note sequence. This is expressed in the following form:

Song = {(a, 1/2), (c¹, 1/8), ... (n, n/x)} (16)

Eventually, a combination of pitch sequences and time value sequences of traditional Chinese music is obtained. The sequences are finally transformed into new music scores.

### Section 3: Design of a data-based heritage resource system for traditional Chinese music

#### 3.1 Traditional Music Database Functional Design

A traditional music database is a digital and intelligent service platform that integrates a variety of functions with the comprehensive use of various information technologies, which can realize the functions of multi-terminal use, multi-dimensional navigation, unified retrieval, and visualization display of traditional music resources [17]. It thoroughly solves the problem of the long-term preservation of traditional music, gives full play to the value of traditional music resources, and promotes the development and inheritance of intangible cultural heritage. Figure 3 displays the system architecture of the traditional music database.

_(Figure 3. Traditional music database system architecture - shows layers: Information Service, Data Logic, Basic Data, with components like multi-device reading, classification, processing, association, storage types.)_

##### 3.1.1 Resource storage function

Traditional music databases need to deposit audio-visual, literary, picture, and other resources into the database in an orderly manner. Traditional music databases use cloud storage to effectively improve database storage efficiency. Through distributed, virtualized, intelligent configuration and other technologies, cloud storage can not only realize the massive data storage of traditional music resources but also facilitate the elastic expansion of storage space, reduce the storage cost, significantly improve the security of data, and abandon the cumbersome operation and risk of technical upgrading and data migration.

##### 3.1.2 Resource search function

The traditional music database's resource search function is crucial. Users search through the database service platform using keywords, titles, and other methods, and the database service platform will quickly present the search results to them. By utilizing this function, users can look for detailed introductions to traditional music, performance video and audio resources, intangible culture inheritors, etc., that they are interested in.

##### 3.1.3 Information recommendation function

The traditional music database platform actively suggests information of interest to users based on their preferences. Certain preferences are displayed by users when using the database platform. For example, some users are interested in the art of Zhucheng school guqin, while others are interested in Guzheng music. The database platform establishes a user interest model, and based on the user's behavioral preferences, it actively recommends intangible cultural heritage resources of interest to the user, which effectively improves the efficiency of the database.

#### 3.2 Construction of traditional music database resource system

Chinese traditional music has many categories, including folk music, religious music, and court music, including folk songs such as mountain songs, labor songs, love songs, and custom songs. The Chinese traditional music database can be designed according to the music form with a main library, 5 sub-databases, and 25 sub-databases, as shown in Figure 4.

_(Figure 4. Schematic design of the traditional music sub-library - shows hierarchy from Traditional Chinese Music to Folk Songs, Rap music, etc., down to specific song types like Pastoral Labour Songs.)_

The musical instruments used in different social situations in China are different from each other, which also makes the traditional musical instruments more complicated. In this database, there are 4 sub-libraries and 12 sub-categories of Chinese traditional musical instruments, as shown in Figure 5.

_(Figure 5. Database of traditional Chinese musical instruments - shows categories like Membrane, String, Aerophonic, Body sound instruments and sub-types.)_

### Section 4: Empirical analysis of the value chain structure of traditional music

#### 4.1 Questionnaire design and data collection

##### 4.1.1 Questionnaire design

Based on domestic and international studies on the evaluation of the value of non-heritage and the study of the value of traditional music, this paper sorts out the influencing factors of the value of non-heritage in the category of traditional music, analyzes the relationship between various types of influencing factors according to the existing classification dimensions, and forms the initial structure of the questionnaire. On this basis, hypotheses about the influencing factors of traditional music-based non-heritage value and their relationship between them are formulated, and the final questionnaire is created.

The questionnaire is mainly divided into two main parts: basic information and main content and the basic information part collects the gender, age, education, specialty, and work nature of the respondents. The main content is evaluated using a Likert 7-level scale assignment, with 1-7 indicating the importance of the indicator and factor from low to high, respectively, and the respondents are asked to score the importance of the influencing factors and indicators. When designing the questionnaire, accurate and concise descriptions were used as much as possible in the specification to avoid errors in data collection.

In this paper, questionnaires were distributed to respondents such as teachers and non-heritage protection workers engaged in related work in schools, research institutions, non-heritage protection centers, group art museums, etc., by using online surveys, on-site surveys, e-mails, and on-site interviews. On the basis of the pre-survey of the questionnaire, a total of 300 questionnaires were recovered, of which 271 valid questionnaires, with a validity rate of 90.33%, were eliminated after the erroneous questionnaires. Table 2 displays the distribution of survey respondents' basic characteristics and basic information.

## Results

_(Table 2. Distribution characteristics of the survey sample - shows demographics like Gender, Age, Professional background, Education level with frequencies and percentages.)_

#### 4.1.2 Descriptive statistical analysis

Based on the distribution of the basic characteristics of the survey respondents, the questionnaire data were further analyzed using descriptive statistics. The use of SPSS software to analyze the survey data at the overall level of descriptive statistics, which mainly contains the mean, standard deviation, deviation, kurtosis, and other information. To verify if the statistical characteristics are met, the descriptive statistical analysis can be derived from the distribution presented by the survey data. The summary of statistical descriptive variables is shown in Table 3, and the results show that the skewness and kurtosis of each question item satisfy the conditions of normal distribution, indicating that each question item of the survey questionnaire is able to obey normal distribution. Analyzing the reliability and validity can be done directly by analyzing the data obtained from the questionnaire on the factors influencing the value of traditional music non-heritage.

_(Table 3. Summary of statistical descriptive variables - shows variables like Long history, Popularity, Scarcity, etc., with N, Min, Max, Mean, Std. Deviation, Variance, Skewness, Kurtosis.)_

#### 4.2 Data analysis and testing

##### 4.2.1 Credibility analysis

In order to ensure the validity of fit evaluation and hypothesis testing, this paper uses the Cronbach reliability coefficient to test the degree of consistency of the medium latent variables of the questionnaire data on each observed variable. If Cronbach's reliability coefficient score falls below 0.5, it is commonly considered that the internal consistency reliability is not sufficient. If the score exceeds 0.8, it indicates that the variable is reliable. Based on the literature research, this paper defines a total of 21 measurement variables, which belong to six latent variables, including own resources, environmental threats, development level, public demand, social cognition, and multiple values. The reliability analysis was conducted for each construct, and the structure of the reliability analysis is shown in Table 4. Through the reliability analysis of each construct, the Cronbach's coefficients of own resources, environmental threats, development level, pluralistic value, public demand, and social cognition set in this paper are 0.805, 0.857, 0.832, 0.814, 0.837, and 0.868, respectively, and Cronbach's coefficients are all greater than 0.8, which indicates that there is a higher consistency reliability within the scale.

_(Table 4. Reliability analysis - shows Latent variables, Number of items, Cronbach's Alpha, Observed variable, and Alpha if item deleted.)_

##### 4.2.2 Validity analysis

Validity analysis generally includes calculating the content validity and structural validity. In order to express the variables more accurately, the questionnaire in this paper is based on literature research and expert consultation, which are based on the results of the pre-survey. It is considered that the content meets the requirements. Therefore, the focus of this stage is to verify the structural validity by conducting exploratory factor analysis on the recovered data. Exploratory factor analysis was carried out with SPSS statistical analysis software, and the data underwent KMO and Bartlett's sphere tests. Table 5 displays the results of KMO and Bartlett's sphere tests.

_(Table 5. KMO and Bartlett's sphere test results - KMO = 0.855, Bartlett Test Approx. Chi-Square = 2539.452, df = 271, Sig. = 0.000.)_

From the table, we can refer to the KMO score of 0.855, which is greater than the standard of 0.8, and the Batlett's sphere test is significant (P<0.05), which indicates that the data of the questionnaire meets the prerequisites for factor analysis. The factors were extracted using principal component analysis for further factor analysis, and they were rotated using variance-maximizing orthogonal rotation for factor analysis. Therefore, the factors were taken by fixing the number of factors to 6. The results of the total variance explained are shown in Table 6. Through factor analysis, the explanatory power of the six principal components extracted using principal component analysis was 15.2423%, 13.8654%, 10.3575%, 8.5421%, 7.3046%, 5.0128%, and the total explanatory power was 60.3247%, which is greater than 50%.

_(Table 6. Results of total variance explained - shows Initial Eigenvalues and Extracting the sum of squares of loads for 21 ingredients/components.)_

##### 4.2.3 Distinguishing Validity

Distinctive validity analysis is to test whether the predefined two-construct correlation is statistically different. Usually, the different constructs of the variables should not have a high degree of correlation, such as a correlation of 0.80 or more means that these variables are measuring the same target and have the same expression, implying that there is excessive overlap in the definition of the constructs. In this paper, the more rigorous AVE method is used to assess the discriminant validity, and the open root sign of the AVE of each factor must be greater than the correlation coefficient of each pair of variables, indicating that there is discriminant validity between the factors. The diagonal line is the standardized correlation coefficient for which the AVE open root sign of each factor is greater than the off-diagonal line, so this study has differential validity, and the diagonal downward triangle is the correlation coefficient. Table 7 shows the discriminant validity and correlation, and the correlation coefficients of own resources, environmental threats, development level, public demand, social cognition and multiple values are 0.4235, 0.0953, 0.3594, 0.4253, 0.5348 and 0.5224, respectively. While referring to the significance P-value, the results indicate that there is a significant correlation coefficient between own resources, development level, public demand and social cognition on the multiple values of traditional music NRL multivariate value there is a significant correlation. There is no significant correlation between environmental threats and the multiple values of NRH. Furthermore, there is a significant link between public demand and social awareness.

_(Table 7. Differential validity and correlations - shows correlation matrix between Own resources, Environmental threats, Level of development, Diverse Values, Public Needs, Social Perception. Diagonal likely contains sqrt(AVE), off-diagonal shows correlations with significance indicated by asterisks.)_

##### 4.2.4 Model fit analysis

This paper establishes a value chain structure model for traditional music NRH to explore the relationship between its resources, public demand, social cognition, environmental threats, development level and the multiple values of NRH. Based on the value chain theory and the analysis of the value chain composition model and influencing factors of traditional music NRH, the value chain structure model of traditional music NRH constructed is shown in Figure 6.

_(Figure 6. Value chain structure model for traditional music-based NRM - shows latent variables (Self-resources, Environmental Threats, Development level, Multiple Values, Policy Impact, Social Perception, Public Demand) with paths and coefficients.)_

1.  **Model fit**
    The fit index of the model, in which the CMINDF index score is 2.384, which is smaller than the standard below 3, the GFI index is 0.873, which has reached the standard above 0.8, and the RMSEA index is 0.073 which is smaller than 0.08. From the results, we can comprehensively see that the fit indexes are in line with the research standard, and thus, it can be assumed that the model has a better fitness.

2.  **Coefficient Results**
    The standardized coefficient of own resources and multiple values of non-heritage is 0.525, and the standard of P<0.05 indicates that there is a significant positive influence between the own resources of non-heritage and its multiple values. The standardized coefficient of 0.385 and P<0.05 of the environmental threat and social cognition of NRL indicates that there is a significant negative influence between the environmental threat and social cognition.

## Conclusion

As an indispensable part of the Chinese traditional cultural system, combining traditional music culture with modern information technology has an important impact, which is conducive to the promotion and development of Chinese national culture. This paper proposes automatic composition based on the Markov chain, which constructs a sample song set by collecting and processing classical traditional folk songs and conducts pitch and time value sequence generation experiments using a probability matrix, which is transformed to obtain the melodic segments of traditional music. Through empirical research conducted through questionnaires, the following conclusions can be drawn:

1.  The correlation coefficients between the cultural inheritance of traditional music and its resources, environmental threats, development level, diversified values, public demand, and social cognition are 0.4235, 0.0953, 0.3594, 0.4253, 0.5348, and 0.5224, respectively, and there is a significant positive influence.
2.  The standardized coefficient of 0.525 for traditional music's resources and the multiple values of non-heritage and the criterion of P<0.05 indicate that there is a significant positive influence between the non-heritage's resources and its multiple values.

## Funding

This research was supported by Chongqing Education Scientific “Fourteen-five” Planning 2021 Year Eestablishment of Project: Analysis and Research on the Musical Form of Huaying High-pitched Tune (2021-GX-323).

## References

[1] MacDonald, L. (2020). Seasons of Love: Chinese millennials' affective amateur musical theatre performances. Performance Research, 25(1), 112-120.
[2] D'Amico, L. (2017). Reality and fiction: audiovisual representations of traditional musical cultures in China. Asian Musicology, 27, 108-136.
[3] Wu, J., Chan, C. J., & Chieng, J. C. Y. (2022). The innovation of Mongolian Folk Song music cultural inheritance Path based on intelligent computing Analysis of communication Big Data. Security and Communication Networks, 2022.
[4] Fang, P. E. N. G. (2021). Optimization of music teaching in colleges and universities based on multimedia technology. Advances in Educational Technology and Psychology, 5(5), 47-57.
[5] Konanchuk, S. (2019). The Problem of Synesthesia in Musical Culture of the Ancient East. Synesthesia: The Synthesis of Arts in World Art Culture, 76.
[6] Grant, C. (2017). Learning and teaching traditional music in Cambodia: Challenges and incentives. International Journal of Music Education, 35(1), 5-16.
[7] Campbell, P. S., & Roberts, J. C. (2019). Teachers as agents of the repatriation of music and cultural heritage. The Oxford Handbook of Musical Repatriation, 283.
[8] Billeri, F. (2017). The process of re-construction and revival of musical heritage in contemporary Cambodia. Moussons. Recherche en sciences humaines sur l'Asie du Sud-Est, (30), 91-109.
[9] Ting, Y., & Ran, Z. (2022). Fusion and Application of Chinese Ethnic Elements in Electroacoustic Music in Mist on a Hill. Organised Sound, 1-13.
[10] Zhang, C., Kwan, J. L. Y., & Leung, B. W. (2023). Adaptation of a Self-Regulated Practice Behavior Scale for Chinese Music Majors. Journal of Research in Music Education, 00224294221147008.
[11] Alieva, I. G., Gorbunova, I. B., & Mezentseva, S. V. (2019). Music computer technologies as a worth-while means of folklore studying, preserving and transmission. Utopía y praxis latinoamericana: revista internacional de filosofía iberoamericana y teoría social, (6), 118-131.
[12] Ghahramani, L., McArdle, K., & Fatorić, S. (2020). Minority community resilience and cultural heritage preservation: A case study of the gullah geechee community. Sustainability, 12(6), 2266.
[13] McGookin, D., Tahiroğlu, K., Vaittinen, T., Kytö, M., Monastero, B., & Vasquez, J. C. (2019). Investigating tangential access for location-based digital cultural heritage applications. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 122, 196-210.
[14] Zhou, H. M. (2022). Musical poetics in instrumental music: China's intangible cultural heritage in the information age. Heritage Science, 10(1), 87.
[15] Xu, Y. (2022). The new media environment presents challenges and opportunities for music education in higher education. Journal of Environmental and Public Health, 2022.
[16] Su, J. (2019). Understanding the changing intangible cultural heritage in tourism commodification: The music players' perspective from Lijiang, China. Journal of Tourism and Cultural Change, 17(3), 247-268.
[17] Wang, Q. (2022). The Digitisation of Intangible Cultural Heritage Oriented to Inheritance and Dissemination under the Threshold of Neural Network Vision. Mobile Information Systems, 2022.
